.TH ANCHORAGE 7 "2026-04-26" "anchorage" "Self-hosting Framework"
.
.SH NAME
anchorage \- container self-hosting framework using podman, caddy, and systemd
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B anchorage
is a lightweight framework for self-hosting containerized applications on a
home server or VPS.
It ties together
.BR podman (1),
.BR caddy (1),
and
.BR systemd (1)
to provide:
.IP \(bu 4
Per-service
.BR podman-compose (1)
lifecycle management via a systemd template unit.
.IP \(bu
Automatic TLS (via Caddy's internal CA) and reverse proxying.
.IP \(bu
Automatic reverse-proxy configuration from labels in
.I docker-compose.yml
files, imported into your existing Caddyfile.
.IP \(bu
Optional DNS registration for local network hostnames.
.
.SH CONFIGURATION
System-wide settings are stored in
.IR /etc/anchorage/anchorage.conf ,
which is a plain
.IR KEY=VALUE
file loaded by all anchorage systemd units.
.PP
.TP
.B DOMAIN_SUFFIX
.RB ( required )
DNS suffix appended to every service hostname to form its fully-qualified
domain name.
Common values:
.IR local ,
.IR home.arpa ,
.IR lan .
.TP
.B IP
IP address of this host, registered in DNS for all service hostnames.
Required only when
.B dns-update.service
is enabled.
.TP
.B DNS_SERVER
Address of the DNS server that accepts dynamic updates via
.BR nsupdate (1).
Required only when
.B dns-update.service
is enabled.
.TP
.B TTL
DNS record time-to-live in seconds.
Defaults to 3600.
.
.SH DIRECTORY STRUCTURE
All container service definitions live under
.IR /var/lib/anchorage/ .
Each service occupies its own subdirectory:
.PP
.nf
/var/lib/anchorage/
    env.shared              # Shared container env vars (optional)
    <service>/
        docker-compose.yml  # Compose file with caddy labels
        env.app             # Service-specific env vars (optional)
        data/               # Persistent data (recommended mount point)
.fi
.PP
.I env.shared
and
.I env.app
are passed to containers via
.BR podman-compose (1)
as
.BR --env-file .
They do not need to be shell-compatible; plain
.I KEY=VALUE
lines are sufficient.
.
.SH ADDING A SERVICE
.SS 1. Create the service directory
.PP
.nf
mkdir -p /var/lib/anchorage/myapp/data
.fi
.SS 2. Write docker-compose.yml
Add
.B caddy.host
and
.B caddy.port
labels so anchorage can generate the reverse proxy entry automatically:
.PP
.nf
# /var/lib/anchorage/myapp/docker-compose.yml
services:
  myapp:
    image: example/myapp:latest
    restart: unless-stopped
    labels:
      caddy.host: myapp        # subdomain (without DOMAIN_SUFFIX)
      caddy.port: "10003"      # host port mapped in the ports section
    ports:
      - "10003:8080"
    volumes:
      - ./data:/data
.fi
.SS 3. Enable and start
.PP
.nf
systemctl enable --now container@myapp.service
systemctl restart caddy    # regenerates Caddyfile and updates DNS
.fi
.
.SH REVERSE PROXY
.B anchorage-gen-caddyfile.service
generates reverse-proxy site blocks for all labelled services and writes
them to
.IR /etc/caddy/anchorage/services.caddy .
The main Caddyfile is
.B not
managed by anchorage; only the following line is inserted into it during
package installation:
.PP
.nf
import /etc/caddy/anchorage/*  # inserted by anchorage
.fi
.PP
You are free to configure the rest of
.I /etc/caddy/Caddyfile
as you see fit.
In particular, if you want Caddy to use its internal CA for TLS, you must
add the global options block yourself:
.PP
.nf
{
    local_certs
}
.fi
.PP
Without
.BR local_certs ,
Caddy will attempt to obtain public certificates via ACME, which requires
a publicly reachable domain.
The root CA certificate (when using
.BR local_certs )
is written to:
.PP
.nf
/home/caddy/.local/share/caddy/pki/authorities/local/root.crt
.fi
.PP
Install this certificate on every device that needs to reach your services.
.
.SH DNS AUTOMATION
.B dns-update.service
runs after caddy starts and registers all service hostnames found in the
Caddyfile via
.BR nsupdate (1).
It reads
.BR IP ,
.BR DNS_SERVER ,
and
.B DOMAIN_SUFFIX
from
.IR /etc/anchorage/anchorage.conf .
.PP
The service is bound to caddy
.RB ( PartOf=caddy.service )
and runs automatically on every caddy start or restart.
Enable it with:
.PP
.nf
systemctl enable dns-update.service
systemctl restart caddy
.fi
.
.SH SYSTEMD UNITS
.TP
.B container@.service
Template unit that manages a single container service.
Instantiate as
.B container@<name>.service
where
.I <name>
matches the directory under
.IR /var/lib/anchorage/ .
Runs as the
.B anchorage
system user (rootless podman).
.TP
.B anchorage-gen-caddyfile.service
Oneshot unit that writes Caddy site blocks for all labelled services to
.IR /etc/caddy/anchorage/services.caddy .
Runs before caddy and is restarted whenever caddy restarts.
.TP
.B dns-update.service
Oneshot unit that pushes DNS A records to a local DNS server.
Runs after caddy starts.
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/anchorage/anchorage.conf
System-wide configuration.
.TP
.I /var/lib/anchorage/
Root directory for all service definitions.
.TP
.I /var/lib/anchorage/env.shared
Environment variables passed into all containers (optional).
.TP
.I /etc/caddy/Caddyfile
Main Caddy configuration file, managed by the user.
Anchorage adds an
.B import
directive here during installation and removes it on purge.
.TP
.I /etc/caddy/anchorage/services.caddy
Auto-generated site blocks for anchorage-managed services.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/anchorage/gen-caddyfile.py
Service snippet generator script.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/anchorage/run.sh
Container startup script invoked by the systemd template unit.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/anchorage/dns-update.sh
DNS registration script.
.TP
.I /var/lib/anchorage/
Home directory of the
.B anchorage
system user.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR podman-compose (1),
.BR caddy (1),
.BR systemd.service (5),
.BR nsupdate (1)
.
.SH AUTHORS
Maintained as part of the anchorage project.
See the source repository for contribution guidelines.
